
# Standard Organ Site Ontologies
For a given dataframe providing columns of strings containing organ sites names or ICD billing codes, three mapping options are provided. In addition, how cancer metastasizes  

## Organ Sites

### 1. Detailed list of curated organ sites 
This manually curated version consisting of 82 unique anatomic locations, mapped to each raw MSK-IMPACT site.

The raw mapping can be found [here](https://github.com/clinical-data-mining/organ-site-mapping/blob/master/mappings/all_sites_clean.csv).


### 2. [Oncotree](http://oncotree.mskcc.org/#/home) tissue types, derived from a transformation of (1)  
Oncotree provides a hierarchical visualization of cancer histologies, down to molecular subtypes. The root of these trees consist of 32 tissues types. 

#### Notes:

Some of the sites in (1) could not be mapped to oncotree:
- abdomen_unknown
- chest_unknown
- lowerExtremity_unknown
- mediastinum_trachea
- mediastinum_heart
- mediastinum_pericardium.serosa
- pelvis_unknown
- perineum_femaleGenital
- perineum_unkown
- retroperitoneum_bloodVessel
- retroperitoneum_unkown
- undeterminate_bloodVessel
- undeterminate_unknown
 
In addition, two of the sites in oncotree couldn’t be mapped:
- Myeloid
- Other 

Also note: pelvis_cervix and head_eye, were added. Also, the mapping of esophagus changed to mediastinum_foregut.

#### Resources
The transformation mapping can be found [here](https://github.com/clinical-data-mining/organ-site-mapping/blob/master/mappings/sites_darwin.csv).



### 3. Organ sites described in ICD billing codes, derived from a transformation of (1)
Secondary malignant neoplasms described in ICD billing codes provide a standardized method for mapping metastatic sites that fit real-world evidence clinical care. 

This mapping links the curated list from (1) to a secondary curated list of 21 organ sites derived from ICD billing codes.

#### Background - How 21 organ sites are derived
 


#### String description vs. billing code mapping
Although the 21 organ sites described are derived from billings codes, the mapping themselves are not only generated by billing codes, but also free-text descriptions of the organ site. It should be noted that the transformation between the mapping of (1) to (3) occurs in two different ways.   

A) The **string description** within cBioPortal is mapped to the 82 sites described in (1), and subsequently to the 21 organ sites described here. This mapping does NOT utilize billing codes to map between (1) and (2).

B) The secondary malignant neoplasm **billing codes** provided in patient EMR documents are mapped to the 82 sites described. As in (A), the 82 sites are then mapped to the 21 organ sites.
     

#### Resources
A mapping of the individual ICD billing codes to organ sites listed in (1) can bere found [here](https://github.com/clinical-data-mining/organ-site-mapping/blob/master/mappings/map_icd_codes_to_rdn_sites.csv).

In addition, the sites in (1) have been aggregated into the 21 ICD billing code derived organ sites in a table  [here](https://github.com/clinical-data-mining/organ-site-mapping/blob/master/mappings/oncotree_to_icd_billing_oncotree_organ_mapping.csv).  

## Routes of dissemination
In addition to mapping organ sites to a specific ontology, the routes of dissemination for metastatic cancer has been mapped, given the primary and metastatic site information. 

The are three mappings of significance to show here: Local extension, lymphatic spread, and hematogenous spread.

### Local extension
Locally advanced cancer can consist of the tumor(s) may have spread to adjacent organs or tissue. For example, cancer in the midgut advancing to the liver is considered a local extension.

The local extension [table](https://github.com/clinical-data-mining/organ-site-mapping/blob/master/mappings/matrix_spread_localext.csv) maps 61 distinct sites (21 sites of the original 82 are non-specific) from primary to metastatic site, and provides a `LOCAL` label if the advancement is local. 

### Lymphatic spead
Locally advanced cancer can also invade lymph nodes that are adjacent to the primary site of cancer, or "regional" lymph nodes. However, when cancer cells break away from a tumor, they can travel to other areas of the body through the lymphatic system to a lymph node "distant" to the primary site.

The table [here](https://github.com/clinical-data-mining/organ-site-mapping/blob/master/mappings/matrix_spread_lymphatic.csv) provides annotations of what lymph nodes would be considered `REGIONAL` or `DISTANT` metastatic spread, given the site of primary disease.  

